.TH simplearchiver 1
.SH NAME
simplearchiver \- An alternative to tar
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B simplearchiver
[\fB\-h | \-\-help\fR]
[ options ]
(\fB\-c | \-t | \-x\fR)
(\fB\-f\fR \fIfilename\fR)
[\-\-]
.IR paths...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B simplearchiver
archives files/directories into an archive file with support for any compressor
that accepts file data in standard-input and outputs compressed file data to
standard-output.

Unlike tar, when \fBsimplearchiver\fR uses a compressor (e.g. with
\fB\-\-compressor\fR \fIcompressor-command\fR), the data is compressed inside
of \fBsimplearchiver\fR's file format, while tar expects the tar file itself to
be compressed.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Prints the "help text" which lists all options with a brief usage hint.
.TP
.BR -c
Tells \fBsimplearchiver\fR to be in "create archive file" mode. This mode
causes \fBsimplearchiver\fR to create the archive (specified with \fB\-f\fR
\fIfile\fR) given the positional arguments as paths to archive. Note that a
positional argument of "." will cause \fBsimplearchiver\fR to archive
everything in the current directory (or the directory specified with \fB-C\fR
\fIpath\fR).
.TP
.BR -t
Tells \fBsimplearchiver\fR to be in "test archive file" mode. Any archive file
specified with \fB\-f\fR \fIfile\fR will be inspected and its contents and
relative metadata will be printed to standard-error.
.TP
.BR -x
Tells \fBsimplearchiver\fR to be in "extract archive file" mode. Any archive
file specified with \fB\-f\fR \fIfile\fR will be extracted to the current
working directory (or to the directory specified with \fB\-C\fR \fIpath\fR).
.TP
.BR -f " " \fIfilename\fR
Sets the filename to be created in "create archive file" mode, checked with
"test archive file" mode, or extracted from with "extract archive file" mode.
Note that in "create archive file" mode, the file will not be overwritten if it
already exists unless if \fB\-\-overwrite\-create\fR is specified. Note that
this is not affected by \fB\-C\fR \fIdirectory\fR.
.TP
.BR -C " " \fIdirectory\fR
Sets the current working directory for archiving or extracting. Note that this
does not affect
\fB\-f\fR \fIfilename\fR.
.TP
.BR --prefix " " \fIprefix\fR " | " --prefix=\fIprefix\fR
Sets a prefix-string to be prepended to every extracted file/directory. Note
that if the prefix-string does not end with a "/", then "/" will be appended to
it before it is used. This affects archive creation and extraction.
.TP
.BR --compressor " " \fIcompressor_command\fR " | " --compressor=\fIcmd\fR
Enables compression and sets the compressor when creating an archive with the
given compressor command. For example, \fB\-\-compressor\fR \fI"gzip"\fR, or
\fB\-\-compressor\fR=\fI"xz"\fR can be used. Using this option requires the use
of \fB\-\-decompressor\fR \fIdecompressor_command\fR.
.TP
.BR --decompressor " " \fIdecompressor_command\fR " | " --decompressor=\fIcmd\fR
Sets the decompressor to be used when an archive is to be extracted later. This
is done by storing the command verbatim in the archive's data when creating an
archive. For example, \fB\-\-decompressor\fR \fI"gzip -d"\fR, or
\fB\-\-decompressor\fR=\fI"unxz"\fR can be used. This option can also be used
when extracting to override the decompressor command stored in the archive.
.TP
.BR --overwrite-create
Tells \fBsimplearchiver\fR to overwrite the archive file (specified with
\fB\-f\fR \fIfilename\fR) when creating an archive.
.TP
.BR --overwrite-extract
Tells \fBsimplearchiver\fR to overwrite files when extracting from an archive
file.
.TP
.BR --no-abs-symlink
Disables storing of absolute paths for symlinks when they are archived.
.TP
.BR --preserve-symlinks
Preserves symlinks by not changing their paths when they are archived. By
default, symlink paths are regenerated to produce valid relative and absolute
paths that are both stored upon archive creation.
.TP
.BR --no-safe-links
On archive creation, enables storing links that point to any path that does not
exist in the created archive. On archive extraction, enables creating links
that point to any path that does refer to any extracted file.
.TP
.BR --temp-files-dir " " \fIdirectory\fR " | " --temp-files-dir=\fIdir\fR
Sets the directory to store temporary files. Note that temporary files are only
created when creating and archive and when compression is being used such that
the temporary file is a compressed file/chunk and is stored into the archive
after the file/chunk has been fully compressed. Naturally, these temporary
files should be automatically deleted by \fBsimplearchiver\fR after they are
used. By default, the directory used is the directory holding the output
archive. If the output is standard-output, then tmpfile(3) is used instead.
.TP
.BR --force-tmpfile
Forces temporary files to use tmpfile(3) when they are created. Note that this
option is mutually exclusive with \fB\-\-temp\-files\-dir\fR.
.TP
.BR --write-version " " \fIversion_number\fR " | " --write-version=\fIver\fR
Forces \fBsimplearchiver\fR to use the specified file format version. Currently
there are versions 0 through 5, and the default is the latest file format. If
you are not sure which to use, it is best to just use the latest version, which
is the default.
.TP
.BR --chunk-min-size " " \fIbytes\fR " | " --chunk-min-size=\fIbytes\fR
Sets the minimum chunk size when creating archives. By default, this is 256MiB.
Note that this value must be specified in bytes or with one of the following
suffixes (without spaces): KB, KiB, MB, MiB, GB, or GiB. "32MiB" is valid but
"32 MiB" is not. The behavior is as follows: combine files into a chunk until
the size of the chunk is at least the "chunk-min-size" value. When it reaches
the value, then the chunk is created/compressed and a new chunk is designated
for the remaining files until there are none left. If there are no more files
to put in a chunk before this limit is reached, then the chunk will simply stop
accumulating files and will be stored/compressed as the last chunk.
.TP
.BR --no-pre-sort-files
Do not pre-sort files before they are stored into a new archive. By default,
files are sorted by size such that the largest file is archived first. If this
option is specified, then the files will be stored in an arbitrary order. This
option is mutually exclusive with "--sort-files-by-name". Note that this option
may not apply to file format 0.
.TP
.BR --sort-files-by-name
Sorts files by filename before archiving. This option is mutually exclusive with
"--no-pre-sort-files". Note that this option may not apply to file format 0.
.TP
.BR --no-preserve-empty-dirs
Do not store empty directories in the archive when created. Note that storing
of empty directories is only done for file formats 2 and onwards by default.
.TP
.BR --force-uid " " \fIUID\fR " | " --force-uid=\fIUID\fR
Force the ownership of all archived items to the given UID when creating an
archive. Note that this option will only take effect on extraction if the
current effective user ID is 0 (root).
.TP
.BR --force-user " " \fIusername\fR " | " --force-user=\fIusername\fR
Force the ownership of all archived items to the given user when creating an
archive. If the user does not exist on the machine creating/extracting an
archive, then \fBsimplearchiver\fR will stop with an error. Note that this
option will only take effect on extraction if the current effective user ID is
0 (root).
.TP
.BR --force-gid " " \fIGID\fR " | " --force-gid=\fIGID\fR
Force the group of all archived items to the given GID when creating or
extracting an archive. Note that this option will only take effect on
extraction if the current effective user ID is 0 (root).
.TP
.BR --force-group " " \fIgroupname\fR " | " --force-group=\fIgroup\fR
Force the group of all archived items to the given group when creating an
archive. If the group does not exist on the machine creating/extracting an
archive, then \fBsimplearchiver\fR will stop with an error. Note that this
option will only take effect on extraction if the current effective user ID is
0 (root).
.TP
.BR --extract-prefer-uid
Prefer the archive's stored UID over username. By default, the username stored
in the archive is preferred.
.TP
.BR --extract-prefer-gid
Prefer the archive's stored GID over groupname. By default, the groupname
stored in the archive is preferred.
.TP
.BR --map-user " " \fIUID/Username\fR:\fIUID/Username\fR " | " --map-user=\fIUID/Username\fR:\fIUID/Username\fR
Store a mapping from a UID/Username to another UID/Username. This will be used
to convert UIDs when archiving. Note that this option will only take effect on
extraction if the current effective user ID is 0 (root).
.TP
.BR --map-group " " \fIGID/Groupname\fR:\fIGID/Groupname\fR " | " --map-group=\fIGID/Groupname\fR:\fIGID/Groupname\fR
Store a mapping from a GID/Grouname to another GID/Groupname. This will be used
to convert GIDs when archiving. Note that this option will only take effect on
extraction if the current effective user ID is 0 (root).
.TP
.BR --force-file-permissions " " \fI3-OctalValues\fR " | " --force-file-permissions=\fI3-OctalValues\fR
Force set permissions for files on archive creation. Note that this option will
only take effect on extraction if the current effective user ID is 0 (root).
For example, a valid value can be 644 or 440.
.TP
.BR --force-dir-permissions " " \fI3-OctalValues\fR " | " --force-dir-permissions=\fI3-OctalValues\fR
Force set permissions for directories on archive creation. Note that this
option will only take effect on extraction if the current effective user ID is
0 (root). For example, a valid value can be 755 or 750. Note that this does not
have any effect on empty directories. See the following option to force
permissions on empty directories.
.TP
.BR --force-empty-dir-permissions " " \fI3-OctalValues\fR " | " --force-empty-dir-permissions=\fI3-OctalValues\fR
Force set permissions for empty directories on archive creation. Note that this
option will only take effect on extraction if the current effective user ID is
0 (root). For example, a valid value can be 755 or 750. Note that this does not
effect intermediate directories that hold files/directories. See the previous
option to force permissions on such directories.
.TP
.BR --whitelist-contains-any " " \fItext\fR " | " --whitelist-contains-any=\fItext\fR
In any archival mode (create/test/extract), only allow files/directories that
contain the specified text. Use this flag multiple times to add more text
entries such that any file/directory path that has ANY of the specified texts
will be allowed/whitelisted.
.TP
.BR --whitelist-contains-all " " \fItext\fR " | " --whitelist-contains-all=\fItext\fR
In any archival mode (create/test/extract), only allow files/directories that
contain the specified text. Use this flag multiple times to add more text
entries such that any file/directory path that has ALL of the specified texts
will be allowed/whitelisted.
.TP
.BR --whitelist-begins-with " " \fItext\fR " | " --whitelist-begins-with=\fItext\fR
In any archival mode (create/test/extract), only allow file/directory paths
that start with the specified text. Use this flag multiple times to add more
text entries such that any path that STARTS with ANY of the specified texts
will be allowed/whitelisted.
.TP
.BR --whitelist-ends-with " " \fItext\fR " | " --whitelist-ends-with=\fItext\fR
In any archival mode (create/test/extract), only allow file/directory paths
that end with the specified text. Use this flag multiple times to add more text
entries such that any path that ENDS with ANY of the specified texts will be
allowed/whitelisted.
.TP
.BR --blacklist-contains-any " " \fItext\fR " | " --blacklist-contains-any=\fItext\fR
In any archival mode (create/test/extract), only block files/directories that
contain the specified text. Use this flag multiple times to add more text
entries such that any file/directory path that has ANY of the specified texts
will be blocked/blacklisted.
.TP
.BR --blacklist-contains-all " " \fItext\fR " | " --blacklist-contains-all=\fItext\fR
In any archival mode (create/test/extract), only block files/directories that
contain the specified text. Use this flag multiple times to add more text
entries such that any file/directory path that has ALL of the specified texts
will be blocked/blacklisted.
.TP
.BR --blacklist-begins-with " " \fItext\fR " | " --blacklist-begins-with=\fItext\fR
In any archival mode (create/test/extract), only block file/directory paths
that start with the specified text. Use this flag multiple times to add more
text entries such that any path that STARTS with ANY of the specified texts
will be blocked/blacklisted.
.TP
.BR --blacklist-ends-with " " \fItext\fR " | " --blacklist-ends-with=\fItext\fR
In any archival mode (create/test/extract), only block file/directory paths
that end with the specified text. Use this flag multiple times to add more text
entries such that any path that ENDS with ANY of the specified texts will be
blocked/blacklisted.
.TP
.BR --wb-case-insensitive
Makes any whitelist/blacklist option case-insensitive (applies only to ASCII
characters).
.TP
.BR --print-file-exts-preset
Prints to stderr the preset used by
\fB\-\-use\-not\-compress\-file\-exts\-preset\fR.
.TP
.BR --use-not-compress-file-exts-preset
Enables a preset of known file extensions to be checked against when archiving
with compression for file format version 6 (and onward). In other words, each
file extension in the preset is added to a set that will be checked against
when checking each file in a chunk. Note that file extension checking is case
insensitive.
.TP
.BR --add-not-compress-ext " " \fIext\fR " | " --add-not-compress-ext=\fIext\fR
Adds an extension to the set of known file extensions to be checked against
when archiving with compression for file format version 6 (and onward). Note
that file extension checking is case insensitive.
.TP
.BR --set-ext-percent-threshold " " \fIpercent\fR " | " --set-ext-percent-threshold=\fIpercent\fR
Sets the threshold (between 0.0 and 1.0) to decide when to compress a v6 chunk.
Note that the default threshold is a low percentage.  The percentage is
calculated per chunk as will_compress_filesize / total_filesizes, and if the
percentage is lower than the threshold, then the chunk is NOT compressed.
.TP
.BR --version
Prints the current version of \fBsimplearchiver\fR.
.TP
.BR --
Specifies that the following arguments are positional arguments that refer to
items to be archived or items to be tested/extracted.
.SH NOTES
.TP
.BR "Temporary Files"
Whenever \fBsimplearchiver\fR creates an archive with a compressor, a temporary
file is created to hold the compressed file/chunk. This is necessary because
\fBsimplearchiver\fR is designed to be streamable, and the size of the
compressed file/chunk is required before storing the compressed data;
Otherwise, \fBsimplearchiver\fR cannot store the length of the data before the
data itself in the archive without seeking. Note that by default, the temporary
file is stored in the same directory as the created archive file. If the output
is standard-output or cannot be accessed, then tmpfile(3) is used. Options that
are related to this behavior are:

\fB\-\-temp\-files\-dir\fR

\fB\-\-force\-tmpfile\fR

.TP
.BR "Chunks"
Starting in file format version 1 (and up to the latest format),
\fBsimplearchiver\fR stores files in "chunks". The size of each chunk is
controlled by the \fB\-\-chunk\-min\-size\fR option and is by default 256MiB. It
may be better to use a larger chunk size if using a compressor with a higher
compression level. Suffixes are supported (without spaces): "KB, KiB, MB, MiB,
GB, and GiB". For example, "32MiB" is valid but "32 MiB" is not. The behavior
of chunks is as follows: combine files into a chunk until the size of the chunk
is at least the "chunk-min-size" value. When it reaches the value, then the
chunk is created/compressed and a new chunk is designated for the remaining
files until there are none left. If there are no more files to put in a chunk
before this limit is reached, then the chunk will simply stop accumulating
files and will be stored/compressed as the last chunk.

.TP
.BR "Symbolic Link Handling"
By default, \fBsimplearchiver\fR archives both relative and absolute paths for
every symlink upon archive creation, and on extraction relative links are
preferred. If the symlink points to a path not archived and
\fB\-\-no\-safe\-links\fR is specified, then the absolute path is preferred on
extraction. Also note that absolute paths can be prevented from being stored on
archive creation with \fB\-\-no\-abs\-symlink\fR. Note that specifying both
\fB\-\-no\-safe\-links\fR and \fB\-\-preserve\-symlinks\fR will store all
symbolic links as is when creating an archive.

.TP
.BR "Conditional Chunk Compression Introduced in File Format Version 6"
By default, \fBsimplearchiver\fR always compresses every chunk if comrpession
is enabled. Two options \fB\-\-use\-not\-compress\-file\-exts\-preset\fR and
\fB\-\-add\-not\-compress\-ext\fR add file extensions to a set that is intially
empty when the program starts. Using these flags opts-in to conditionally not
compressing some chunks based on a heuristic (percentage of compressible files
compared to a percentage threshold) even if a compressor is specfied. Note that
checking file extensions is case-insensitive. A percentage threshold is used to
determine when to compress a chunk and is set to a low percentage by default.
This threshold can be changed with the option
\fB\-\-set\-ext\-percent\-threshold\fR.  When creating an archive with a
specified compressor, this set is checked against with every file in the chunk.
A percentage is calculated which is the file-sizes of files that do not match
an extension in the set divided by all the file-sizes. When that percentage
exceeds the threshold, then the chunk WILL be compressed. Otherwise, a
percentage less than the threshold WILL NOT be compressed. For example, the
threshold is 0.2 (20%) and the percentage was calculated as 0.7 (70%) that
corresponds to 70% of the file-size representing files that are compressible
(their file extensions are not in the set). This results in the chunk being
compressed because the calculated percentage of 0.7 is greater than 0.2.
